README.md, before:

This is a list of comments I've either made at meetings or written to public
officials.

I'm making this list public because I shared a letter once and [it ended up on
Slate/Mother Jones][slate], so it seems useful.

[slate]: http://www.motherjones.com/environment/2017/06/climate-change-housing-berkeley/

## Contacting Your Representatives

The most useful thing to do is to call on the phone or show up in person if
there is an opportunity for public comment and tell your elected officials what
you think.

Short of this, you can use this [emailer](https://sf-yimby-emailer.appspot.com)
to send messages to your elected officials - it sends one email at a time to
each person on the list, so it looks like they're personalized.

## Housing Approval Talking Points

- We've failed to build housing to keep up with the numbers of jobs we're
creating (see per-county stats below). This leads to high prices and longer
commutes.

- I would rather deal with an X crisis (parking, traffic, zucchini) than a
housing crisis.

- Building infill housing close to transit is good for the environment. Dense
housing uses less water; SF County has lowest per-person water use in the state.
See [water-usage.md][water-usage].

- The fastest growing cities in the Bay Area are [Brentwood, Gilroy, Rio Vista,
all out in the suburbs][sprawl], all single family homes with lawns, mostly
people with long commutes. We should be building more infill development instead
of pushing people to the outskirts of the Bay Area.

- **Building housing lowers rents** - SF built 5000 units last year and saw
  rents drop.

    - Areas that build the most housing relative to population change see the
    lowest price increases: https://twitter.com/lenkiefer/status/871785655164182529

    - From 2000-2015 [Seattle built 9 times as much housing as Oakland; also has
    rents at half Oakland's level][seattle].

- **Building housing lowers move-in evictions** - SF built 5000 units last year,
  a record, and owner move-in evictions dropped. If new market rate units caused
  evictions, it would be hard to explain why they dropped when SF built a record
  amount.

- **Building more housing reduces displacement.** - "Lower Costs Reduce Chances
of Displacement," http://www.lao.ca.gov/Publications/Report/3345

<img src="http://www.lao.ca.gov/reports/2016/3345/6518.png" />

[seattle]: https://twitter.com/tim_mulshine/status/875744613486612480
[water-usage]: https://github.com/kevinburke/public-comments/blob/master/water-usage.md

## Market Rate vs BMR

Only 4% of San Francisco renters are in subsidized below-market-rate housing.
The rest of the city, including the majority of people making below the area's
annual median income, rent in units that reset to the market rate when a new
tenant moves in.

"Market rate" also counts units that rent for less than the average - a Richmond
house built in 1940 that rents for $1000 a month is "market rate".

A 1% increase in the market rate rent translates to an extra $20 million per
year paid by tenants to landlords. 13% of tenants move each year; these 13%
paying an extra 1% translates to $20 million. Over 15 years, as more people move
and start paying the extra 1%, the total transfer from tenants to landlords is
$1.5 billion. (All numbers according to San Francisco's chief economist)

## Planning Commission Project Approval Talking Points

- If neighbors are concerned with a project that complies with existing zoning,
they should purchase an easement that prevents the property owner from (building
too tall/casting a shadow/replacing a tree). If they do not do that the Planning
Commission should conclude that the property owner values the housing more than
the neighbors value sunlight. There is no need for the Planning Commission to
get involved.

- There is no "right to sunlight" in the USA. Making decisions based on sunlight
for neighbors implies your neighbors have some sort of covenant over your
property above and beyond what the zoning code says. This is unfair to the
property owner.

- By amending or delaying a project that complies with zoning codes we are
rewarding the neighbor for a lack of knowledge of zoning codes and foresight
about the types of buildings that might be built nearby.

## City Requirements under HAA

The Housing Accountability Act (HAA) ties cities hands in important ways - often
times they are legally required to issue permits to projects. See [HAA.md][haa] for
more info.

[sprawl]: http://www.eastbaytimes.com/2017/05/01/as-california-grows-menlo-park-and-other-bay-area-cities-see-population-boom/

## City Requirements about Schools

It is illegal under CA Government Code 65596 for a local government to take
any decision on the grounds that schools would be insufficient. E.g. you can't
argue that "schools would be overcrowded" to deny a project.

## Homelessness talking points

Homelessness is largely a problem in cities with high housing prices. Cities
without high housing prices see much lower rates of homelessness.

Two thirds of SF's homeless population [lived in SF before becoming
homeless][homeless-sf]. 55% of those were here longer than ten years.

[homeless-sf]: https://twitter.com/alastairgee/status/875756743522897920

## Response to Specific Objections

#### San Francisco doesn't have any more room

SF is half as dense as Brooklyn and a lot of SF is zoned for
single family housing. Look at this chart for example - we
have a lot of very low density close to BART and SFMUNI lines.
https://twitter.com/graue/status/868001323685302272

## Job Creation vs. Housing Creation By SFBA County

In SF and Oakland we've added [17 new jobs for each new housing unit
permitted][jobs-housing]. This points to a problem of insufficient housing
supply.

[jobs-housing]: https://twitter.com/rolandlisf/status/875758993531994112

Jobs data comes from
https://data.edd.ca.gov/Labor-Force-and-Unemployment-Rates/Local-Area-Unemployment-Statistics-LAUS-Annual-Ave/7jbb-3rb8

"Jobs" is counting the number of employed people.

Housing numbers come from
http://www.dof.ca.gov/Forecasting/Demographics/Estimates/E-5/, which are saved
as the Excel spreadsheet in here.

##### San Francisco County

```
Housing in 2010 in San Francisco: 376,162
Housing in 2017 in San Francisco: 392,619
Net Housing Added:                 16,457

Jobs in 2010 in San Francisco: 442,700
Jobs in 2016 in San Francisco: 541,600
Net Jobs Added:                 98,900
```

##### San Mateo County

```
Housing in 2010 in San Mateo County: 271,031
Housing in 2017 in San Mateo County: 277,189
Net Housing Added:                     4,158

Jobs in 2010 in San Mateo County: 360,200
Jobs in 2016 in San Mateo County: 435,200
Net Jobs Added:                    75,000
```

##### Santa Clara

```
Housing in 2010 in Santa Clara County: 631,920
Housing in 2017 in Santa Clara County: 661,785
Net Housing Added:                      29,803

Jobs in 2010 in Santa Clara County:   830,100
Jobs in 2016 in Santa Clara County:   987,900
Net Jobs Added:                       157,800
```

#### Contra Costa

```
Jobs in 2010 in Contra Costa County: 467,900
Jobs in 2016 in Contra Costa County: 531,800
Net Jobs Added:                       63,900

Housing in 2010 in Contra Costa County: 400,263
Housing in 2016 in Contra Costa County: 409,783
Net Housing Added:                        9,520
```

[haa]: https://github.com/kevinburke/public-comments/blob/master/HAA.md

Commit message:

add more statistics about rent increases

README.md, after:

This is a list of comments I've either made at meetings or written to public
officials.

I'm making this list public because I shared a letter once and [it ended up on
Slate/Mother Jones][slate], so it seems useful.

[slate]: http://www.motherjones.com/environment/2017/06/climate-change-housing-berkeley/

## Contacting Your Representatives

The most useful thing to do is to call on the phone or show up in person if
there is an opportunity for public comment and tell your elected officials what
you think.

Short of this, you can use this [emailer](https://sf-yimby-emailer.appspot.com)
to send messages to your elected officials - it sends one email at a time to
each person on the list, so it looks like they're personalized.

## Housing Approval Talking Points

- We've failed to build housing to keep up with the numbers of jobs we're
creating (see per-county stats below). This leads to high prices and longer
commutes.

- I would rather deal with an X crisis (parking, traffic, zucchini) than a
housing crisis.

- Building infill housing close to transit is good for the environment. Dense
housing uses less water; SF County has lowest per-person water use in the state.
See [water-usage.md][water-usage].

- The fastest growing cities in the Bay Area are [Brentwood, Gilroy, Rio Vista,
all out in the suburbs][sprawl], all single family homes with lawns, mostly
people with long commutes. We should be building more infill development instead
of pushing people to the outskirts of the Bay Area.

- **Building housing lowers rents** - SF built 5000 units last year and saw
  rents drop.

    - Areas that build the most housing relative to population change see the
    lowest price increases: https://twitter.com/lenkiefer/status/871785655164182529

    - From 2000-2015 [Seattle built 9 times as much housing as Oakland; also has rents at half Oakland's level][seattle].

- **Building housing lowers move-in evictions** - SF built 5000 units last year,
  a record, and owner move-in evictions dropped. If new market rate units caused
  evictions, it would be hard to explain why they dropped when SF built a record
  amount.

- **Building more housing reduces displacement.** - "Lower Costs Reduce Chances
of Displacement," http://www.lao.ca.gov/Publications/Report/3345

- **Lack of housing construction is a public health emergency**

    - Santa Clara County [homeless population under 25 tripled from 2015 to 2017][homeless-under-25].
    "A lot of it has to do with the lack of affordable housing.. A generation
    ago someone could literally find a room with a roommate for $75 a month. Now
    you can't find that for $750 a month. They're just out of luck — that’s the new
    reality."

    - 50 [RV's along El Camino Real in Palo Alto][rvs]. Including a family that owns
      a home in Stockton but couldn't find work there, tired of the commute.

<img src="http://www.lao.ca.gov/reports/2016/3345/6518.png" />

[rvs]: http://www.mercurynews.com/2017/06/30/im-not-causing-anyone-harm-rv-owners-cite-housing-crunch-for-living-in-vehicles/
[homeless]: http://www.mercurynews.com/2017/06/30/san-jose-huge-surge-in-homeless-silicon-valley-youth
[seattle]: https://twitter.com/tim_mulshine/status/875744613486612480
[water-usage]: https://github.com/kevinburke/public-comments/blob/master/water-usage.md

## Market Rate vs BMR

Only 4% of San Francisco renters are in subsidized below-market-rate housing.
The rest of the city, including the majority of people making below the area's
annual median income, rent in units that reset to the market rate when a new
tenant moves in.

"Market rate" also counts units that rent for less than the average - a Richmond
house built in 1940 that rents for $1000 a month is "market rate".

A 1% increase in the market rate rent translates to an extra $20 million per
year paid by tenants to landlords. 13% of tenants move each year; these 13%
paying an extra 1% translates to $20 million. Over 15 years, as more people move
and start paying the extra 1%, the total transfer from tenants to landlords is
$1.5 billion. (All numbers according to San Francisco's chief economist)

## Planning Commission Project Approval Talking Points

- If neighbors are concerned with a project that complies with existing zoning,
they should purchase an easement that prevents the property owner from (building
too tall/casting a shadow/replacing a tree). If they do not do that the Planning
Commission should conclude that the property owner values the housing more than
the neighbors value sunlight. There is no need for the Planning Commission to
get involved.

- There is no "right to sunlight" in the USA. Making decisions based on sunlight
for neighbors implies your neighbors have some sort of covenant over your
property above and beyond what the zoning code says. This is unfair to the
property owner.

- By amending or delaying a project that complies with zoning codes we are
rewarding the neighbor for a lack of knowledge of zoning codes and foresight
about the types of buildings that might be built nearby.

## City Requirements under HAA

The Housing Accountability Act (HAA) ties cities hands in important ways - often
times they are legally required to issue permits to projects. See [HAA.md][haa] for
more info.

[sprawl]: http://www.eastbaytimes.com/2017/05/01/as-california-grows-menlo-park-and-other-bay-area-cities-see-population-boom/

## City Requirements about Schools

It is illegal under CA Government Code 65596 for a local government to take
any decision on the grounds that schools would be insufficient. E.g. you can't
argue that "schools would be overcrowded" to deny a project.

## Homelessness talking points

Homelessness is largely a problem in cities with high housing prices. Cities
without high housing prices see much lower rates of homelessness.

Two thirds of SF's homeless population [lived in SF before becoming
homeless][homeless-sf]. 55% of those were here longer than ten years.

[homeless-sf]: https://twitter.com/alastairgee/status/875756743522897920

## Response to Specific Objections

#### San Francisco doesn't have any more room

SF is half as dense as Brooklyn and a lot of SF is zoned for
single family housing. Look at this chart for example - we
have a lot of very low density close to BART and SFMUNI lines.
https://twitter.com/graue/status/868001323685302272

## Job Creation vs. Housing Creation By SFBA County

In SF and Oakland we've added [17 new jobs for each new housing unit
permitted][jobs-housing]. This points to a problem of insufficient housing
supply.

[jobs-housing]: https://twitter.com/rolandlisf/status/875758993531994112

Jobs data comes from
https://data.edd.ca.gov/Labor-Force-and-Unemployment-Rates/Local-Area-Unemployment-Statistics-LAUS-Annual-Ave/7jbb-3rb8

"Jobs" is counting the number of employed people.

Housing numbers come from
http://www.dof.ca.gov/Forecasting/Demographics/Estimates/E-5/, which are saved
as the Excel spreadsheet in here.

##### San Francisco County

```
Housing in 2010 in San Francisco: 376,162
Housing in 2017 in San Francisco: 392,619
Net Housing Added:                 16,457

Jobs in 2010 in San Francisco: 442,700
Jobs in 2016 in San Francisco: 541,600
Net Jobs Added:                 98,900
```

##### San Mateo County

```
Housing in 2010 in San Mateo County: 271,031
Housing in 2017 in San Mateo County: 277,189
Net Housing Added:                     4,158

Jobs in 2010 in San Mateo County: 360,200
Jobs in 2016 in San Mateo County: 435,200
Net Jobs Added:                    75,000
```

##### Santa Clara

```
Housing in 2010 in Santa Clara County: 631,920
Housing in 2017 in Santa Clara County: 661,785
Net Housing Added:                      29,803

Jobs in 2010 in Santa Clara County:   830,100
Jobs in 2016 in Santa Clara County:   987,900
Net Jobs Added:                       157,800

Rent in 2014 in Santa Clara County:     $2161
Rent in 2017 in Santa Clara County:     $2562
Pct Rent Increase:                        18%
```

(via https://www.rentcafe.com/average-rent-market-trends/us/ca/santa-clara-county/santa-clara/)

#### Contra Costa

```
Jobs in 2010 in Contra Costa County: 467,900
Jobs in 2016 in Contra Costa County: 531,800
Net Jobs Added:                       63,900

Housing in 2010 in Contra Costa County: 400,263
Housing in 2016 in Contra Costa County: 409,783
Net Housing Added:                        9,520
```

[haa]: https://github.com/kevinburke/public-comments/blob/master/HAA.md
