I grew up in the Bay Area and I’ve lived here my whole life. I’d love to keep
living here; my parents are here, my girlfriend’s family is here, jobs are here,
my friends are here. I’m worried the way rent prices are going that this won’t
be feasible. I’m worried my kids won’t have a chance to be able to stay here.

Since 2010 Santa Clara County has added 158,000 jobs and only 30,000 new housing
units. More workers and little new housing means increased competition for homes
and apartments, prices have gone way up. Since 2010, average Santa Clara rents
have increased from $1700 to $2930. This is a problem state wide: one third of
California renters pay more than half their salary in rent. That’s really hard
for a lot of people and makes it hard for a lot of small businesses to compete.

We’re trying to save up to buy a home and it’s way more difficult to do this
than it used to be, because homes are more expensive, and we have to pay so much
to the landlord every month. My girlfriend and I pay about as much in rent per
year as a homeowner with an $800,000 mortgage would pay. It’s tougher for us to
save.

Fundamentally the cause of higher housing prices is we’ve added a lot more
jobs and a lot more people all through the Bay Area and we haven’t added
enough housing for the new people - all of our children and people that have
moved to the Bay Area in search of a better job or a better lot in life. This
increased competition has driven housing prices up, and also driven people to
the outskirts of the Bay Area - Gilroy, Brentwood, Rio Vista, Stockton, and
Livermore all led the area in population growth last year. That’s not good for
the environment because those people have lawns and long commutes. That’s also
not great for Cupertino traffic, because those people all have to drive long
distances, through Cupertino, to their jobs.

In particular Cupertino has added many new jobs in the form of a new campus for
Apple with 11,000 employees. Those people have to live somewhere. If Cupertino
does not build enough housing, they will live in Belmont or Gilroy and drive up
the price of apartments and homes near me.

The Oaks Shopping Center plan would add more housing in Cupertino, especially
for the new office workers at Apple. This would help keep housing prices
lower, by adding more housing for people to live in. It may be taller than the
surrounding area, and bring more cars to the immediate area, but I’d much rather
have a views crisis or a traffic crisis than a housing crisis. More housing will
also help Santa Clara County’s worst off, and Santa Clara County’s new college
grads, afford to stay and live in the area.

Please vote to approve the Oaks Shopping Center General Plan amendment. I would
love if you could approve the plan alternative that includes the most new
housing, though I understand this may be politically infeasible.

Thanks very much,
Kevin
