Please approve DSP amendments to build more housing

I'm a renter in Belmont and I'm trying to save up to buy a home. I'm interested
in this project because your decision will have an effect on rent prices
throughout the area. Please vote to approve the Downtown Specific Plan amendment
to allow 790 housing units on blocks 18 and 22.

Since 2010, Santa Clara County has made room for 157,800 new jobs, but only
29,800 new housing units. This has increased the competition for apartments in
Sunnyvale. Over that same time frame, [average rent in Sunnyvale has increased
from $1638 to $2937][sunnyvale-rents]. This is a huge struggle for working
families; across California, a third of renters pay more than half their salary
in rent. I get hit twice when saving for a home; I can't save as much because
I'm paying more in rent, and home prices are now higher than they used to be, so
I have to have a bigger down payment.

Not building enough housing has also worsened traffic up and down the peninsula.
We've added more jobs than places for people to live, so people commute in from
Gilroy, Morgan Hill, and Dublin, each of which led the Bay Area last year in
population growth. Homes there are more likely to have lawns, and the commuters
are likelier to have longer commutes, which hurt the environment and increase
traffic. By building more housing close to jobs in Sunnyvale, we're helping to
decrease average commutes and help the environment.

We desperately need more housing in every Peninsula city. I understand this may
be taller than some residents would like, but I'd much rather have a height
crisis or a views crisis than a housing crisis. Please vote to approve the
Downtown Specific Plan amendment for 790 units, to help ease the pressure Bay
Area's renters are feeling.

Thanks,
Kevin

[sunnyvale-rents]: https://www.rentjungle.com/average-rent-in-sunnyvale-rent-trends/
