Hi,
I'm a Belmont resident, a small business owner and a renter living on Old County Road. Thank you for your work on the draft EIR. It's a good step in the right direction. I appreciate the steps taken toward increasing density near Caltrain, rezoning the areas around Ralston and OCR as mixed use (instead of its current freeway designation). I also appreciate the steps toward unbundling parking, which decrease the cost of building new housing and encourage eco-friendly modes of transportation like car sharing, taking public transit and biking.

The biggest environmental impact of Belmont's proposed general plan isn't measured in the EIR or even required as part of CEQA analysis. It's the continued failure of Peninsula cities to add as many housing units as it's adding jobs. Since 2010 San Mateo County has added 75,000 new jobs and only 4,100 new housing units. Yet Belmont proposes to worsen this ratio, by adding more jobs than housing units.

When there are more jobs than there are places for people to live to work in those jobs, we end up with people commuting really long distances from places like Gilroy, Livermore, or Morgan Hill, all of which led the Bay in population growth last year. The EIR does not take into account the environmental impact from a family that could have lived in Belmont if it had more housing, but instead buys a single family home in Gilroy or Morgan Hill. Gilroy is not a job center or very close to a job center. Gilroy has more homes with lawns; the EIR does not take into account that water use is higher when people choose homes with lawns instead of condos/duplexes/apartments in Belmont.

I think Belmont could and should do a lot more to plan for more housing units, in excess of even the amounts proposed by Alternative 1. The plan calls for roughly 0.6% growth every year. Menlo Park recently grew by 5% in a single year; Mountain View is aggressively adding housing along ECR and planning to add 10,000 units in North Bayshore (a 30% population increase). In particular I would like to see:

- Higher density in the Belmont Village area and for student housing next to NDNU. Building designated-as-affordable housing is admirable but majority of people making low and very low incomes rent at market rates, and will for some time. The more housing we add, the lower market rate rents will be. Especially next to Caltrain, we should be zoning for 4 stories and encouraging use of the state's density bonuses to construct 4 or 5 story apartment buildings. There will be six trains an hour stopping at Belmont when electrification is finished; we can support that many commuters near Caltrain. We should also help our students have more places to live near NDNU.

- Zoning parts of the Harbor Industrial Area for R-2/R-3/R-4 housing. Manhattan used to be composed of farms, but gradually switched to skyscrapers as the land became more valuable. The land in the Peninsula is some of the most valuable in the country and it's not clear that industrial is the highest value use for the land. Where owners of light industry properties in the area are willing to sell, new buyers should be able to add apartments.

- More parts of Belmont rezoned from R-1 to R-2 or R-3, especially between OCR and 101. Single family zoning was pioneered in Berkeley in the early 1900's as a way to exclude "undesirables" and "heathen Chinese." The racial animus may be gone from zoning codes, but they help preserve the demographic makeup of the people that were able to purchase homes (and get loans in the 1960's) in Belmont when homes were more affordable, or on the market. Single family zoning preserves lots of land (and tax breaks) for wealthy homeowners, and push more people to rent. Renters (like myself) do not get any tax breaks. It is hard to argue that the "harm" to existing Belmont homeowners from a few extra duplexes around the edges of the SFH areas outweighs the pressing need of our young people and our poor for a place to live.

- Focus less on adding jobs, and more on adding housing. The unemployment rate in San Mateo County is 3%. We are doing fantastically on ensuring that people who want jobs can get one. Yet there are so many people I know (including myself) who can't afford to live where they grew up, paying more than half their salary in rent, driving 2 hours each way to get to work, or fleeing the Bay Area for less expensive homes. We should be focusing more on adding homes and less on adding offices. I've lived in the Bay Area my whole life, my parents are here, and I'd like to keep living here, though I worry more and more about my ability to keep doing that.

Thanks for considering my concerns,
Kevin
