My name is Kevin Burke, I'm a renter and a small business owner here in Belmont, like 40%.

Rent is a really big concern for the community. Since 2010, rents in San Mateo
County have gone from $1600 to $3100. State wide a third of renters are paying
more than half their salary in rent.

Since 2010 Belmont has added 75,000 jobs and 4,000 new housing units. This has
increased competition for apartments in Belmont and driven up rents. I would
like to point out that homeowners are largely protected from higher prices
thanks to 30 year mortgages and Prop 13. Renters are not protected, if prices go
up it hits your pocketbook immediately. Several renters who gave comments have
seen their rents double in the last four years. Other renters were scared to
give comments for fear of retaliation from their landlord.

I am very worried that the proposed plan calls for adding more jobs than
housing. This seems like it's setting us up for more rent increases, especially
when you consider that the cities to the north and the south are also adding
more jobs than housing.

I find the focus on jobs a little bewildering. The unemployment rate is 2.5%,
which is really low; most people who are looking for a job can find one. But
housing is really difficult. We just had a report come in that San Mateo County
*lost* 1800 jobs, in large part due to the high price of housing, it's hard to
hire here.

A number of Belmont renters expressed a desire in the comments to switch to
Alternative 1, which would add a more balanced mix of jobs and housing. In
particular this would increase the number of units that are offered at below
market rates. It would also ensure that enough new units are being brought
online to match the number of new office jobs being offered in Belmont.

I understand that housing is subject to market conditions, and the numbers may
vary, but it seems better to start from a estimated 2400 new housing units and
2100 jobs than a much higher base of jobs and a much lower number of housing.

If that is not reasonable I would ask the City Council to include language to
monitor rent prices and consider revisiting the zoning mix if average rents
exceed a certain amount. I don't think it's unreasonable to see rents increase
another 30-50% within the next few years.

Re: EIR, I think it measures the wrong thing; it measures whether people have an
environmental impact. It should be measuring where people will have the least
environmental impact. When we build more jobs than housing towns like Gilroy
become the fastest growing towns and that's a lot of lawns and long commutes.
I think it would be much better for the environment to have people here in
Belmont.
