I'm a small business owner and renter here in Belmont, 42% of Belmont residents
rent apartments. I'm trying to save up to buy a home.

As you may be aware the high price of rent is a big area of concern for renters
and for the business community. State wide, one in three renters pays more than
half their salary in rent. My girlfriend and I are going to pay $40,000 this
year on rent. Many renters may be scared to speak out; I spoke to two people
who were afraid of giving a public comment for fear of retaliation from their
landlord.

Since 2010, San Mateo County has added 75,000 jobs and only 4,000 new housing
units. That has increased competition for apartments: in that same time frame
the average rent has gone from $1600 to $3100. The new Plan calls for Belmont to
add 3300 new jobs and only 1500 new housing units. That would be fine except
every community is (and has continued to) add more jobs than housing; SF added
98,000 jobs, only 17,000 housing units since 2010, Santa Clara added 157,000
jobs, only 30,000 housing units since 2010. So it's not clear where those extra
people are going to live.

When you have more jobs than housing the people have to come from somewhere,
which means long commutes more traffic. The fastest growing towns in the Bay
Area are places like Gilroy, Morgan Hill, Brentwood, and Dublin, mostly single
family homes with lawns. That's not good for the environment, and it's not good
for traffic when these people drive long distances to jobs. Belmont's plan would
exacerbate this by adding many more jobs than housing units. This would also put
more stress on rents for apartments in Belmont.

One of the reasons this math pencils out is because the traffic impact was
measured using level of service. Level of service basically prioritizes a 20
minute commute on an empty freeway over a 5 minute commute on a congested road -
it has to do with how fast you can get around the roads. The state is changing
EIR's to use vehicle miles traveled instead, which would look more favorably on
building more housing here in Belmont.

Fundamentally there's a contradiction at the heart of any EIR. The contradiction
is that people are environmental impacts! We use electricity, we drive cars,
we take showers and boil water. From that perspective of course adding more
people in Belmont will have an environmental impact. I think a better question
is: what is the environmental impact of adding an extra person in an apartment
in Belmont, or an extra person in a single family home with a lawn in Gilroy? I
think there's a good argument that they'd have less of an environmental impact
in Belmont.

Adding 3300 jobs and only 1500 new housing units would worsen the
jobs/housing imbalance and increase competition for apartments in Belmont. The
unemployment rate in San Mateo County is about 2%. It's not clear we need more
room for office space but literally every month someone I know is leaving the
Bay Area because of the high price of housing. I would like you to consider
Alternative 1 in the plan, which would add 2400 housing units and 2100 jobs. I
think this would be much better for traffic, for the environment, and for the
community as a whole.
