# Belmont General Plan

The city of Belmont is updating its General Plan, which determines who is
allowed to build what (and how high) in what locations. The Plan is expected to
cover all development in the city until 2035.

California law requires Belmont to evaluate the environmental impacts of its
plan, through what is called an "environmental impact report" or EIR. Belmont
just released a [draft EIR][draft-eir] and is currently seeking comments on it.

**Your feedback 100% matters!!** This is a participative process. The draft will
likely change in response to feedback from the public. Even a 1 minute email
that says "I live in Belmont, please build as much affordable housing as you
possibly can, the rent is too high" will help.

### Belmont Wants to Add More Jobs Than Housing

First, some background:

- Since 2010, San Mateo County has added 30,000 people, 75,000 jobs and only
4,000 new housing units. As a result, there are more people and more workers
competing for fewer apartments.

- Since 2010, the [average rent in San Mateo County has doubled][rent].

- Unemployment in San Mateo County is currently at 2.7%, which is extremely low.

These data points suggest that the area desperately needs more housing. However,
the draft EIR [suggests Belmont should add 3,300 jobs and only 1,500 housing
units][belmont-jobs-housing] (see page 2). This will increase the competition
for housing in the area and drive up your rent even more.

[belmont-jobs-housing]: https://github.com/kevinburke/public-comments/blob/master/belmont-general-plan/belmont-units-alternatives.pdf

### Problems with Belmont's EIR

The Environmental Impact Report only measures the impact of people from live in
Belmont. It does **not** consider the impact of people who *could* have lived in
Belmont if it built more housing, but were forced to live elsewhere.

The [fastest growing cities in the Bay Area were Rio Vista, Gilroy, Livermore,
Brentwood][sprawl], all on the edges of the bay. Generally, people in these
communities have much longer commutes than Belmont residents. They also are
more likely to have large lawns and higher water use. This is not good for the
environment. **But Belmont's EIR does not take into account the environmental
impacts of pushing people to the outskirts of the Bay Area.**

### How to Help

Come to the Planning Commission hearing on the EIR. It is August 15th at ??? PM at ??? address. 

Send a comment to the Belmont City Council asking for more space for housing and
less space for offices. *Be sure to mention you are a Belmont resident and a
renter.* You can cite the numbers above.

Carlos de Melo<br>
Community Development Director<br>
[cdemelo@belmont.gov](mailto:cdemelo@belmont.gov)

Belmont City Council<br>
[CityCouncil@belmont.gov](mailto:CityCouncil@belmont.gov)

Put "Draft EIR feedback" as the subject line. If you want to put specific
details in your email, here are some specific things to ask for:

- **Switch to using Alternative 1**, which adds more housing and fewer offices.

- **More housing in Belmont Village** and fewer offices.

- **Rezone Harbor Industrial Area for Multifamily Housing**

- **Rezone some R-1 areas as R-2** (Duplexes)

[draft-eir]: http://www.belmont-2035generalplan.com/library.html
[rent]: https://www.rentjungle.com/average-rent-in-san-mateo-rent-trends/
[sprawl]: http://www.eastbaytimes.com/2017/05/01/as-california-grows-menlo-park-and-other-bay-area-cities-see-population-boom/
