I'm a renter here in Belmont. I think you all know where I stand; I think more
housing would help lower prices and help renters stay in Belmont. More density
would bring in more revenue which would help the city.

Clearly wages are important to you based on tonight's vote, I would point out
that rents have been increasing by 5-10% a year and a lot of people are paying
half their salary in rent. If you can build enough housing to keep rents from
going up, you can help put more money in people's pockets.

I understand it's going to be tough to make changes at this point but I had a
few suggestions. One, office and retail space has a structural advantage due
to Prop 13 and I was wondering if it would be possible to lower the parking
minimums for housing units. Parking is extremely expensive and fewer parking
units would help projects "pencil."

Caltrain electrification is coming which should improve the quality of public
transit. Maybe we could tie reduced parking minimums to the public transit level
of service? For example if you can get from Belmont to Millbrae BART in less
than 30 minutes, or Powell St BART in less than an hour, you don't have to build
as much parking?

Second I was hoping that community benefits could be defined more objectively,
for example, 30% affordable housing qualifies for 2.5 FAR, or, "if you give
every resident a monthly Caltrain pass you get 2.5 FAR." I understand that
benefits may change based on location, but you could still objectively define
the benefits and then choose between them. The goal would be to increase the
predictability in the planning process and make it easier for developers to
figure out whether projects "pencil," especially when you do the math, most of
them are going to be going for that 2.5 FAR because other wise there's no way
you can get a loan.

What we see in San Francisco and in Oakland is that a process that involves more
negotiation and horse trading favors larger developers who understand how those
processes work and I'd prefer if everything was objective up front. Further
projects from larger developers tend to generate more community opposition.

Third I was wondering if the city could make a commitment to track rent on
a percentile basis, that is, what's the 20th percentile rent, what's the median
rent, what's the 80th percentile rent. Also if the city could make a commitment
to track the number of evictions every year and be willing to reconsider the
zoning allocation in the event that rents increase by too much.

Fourth there was a nice chart showing assessed value relative to land value and
I was wondering if the city could try to track how many lots actually "pencil"
at any given time and FAR and housing density, that is, how many lots are
actually feasible to buy, tear down and build more housing units on. If the goal
is to build more housing it would be good to track how much is actually feasible
at any given time and commit to revisiting the rules around impact fees, FAR,
parking if it's not feasible to build.
