While I appreciated the cogent view of Sacramento politics, I think the position
the IJ has taken on Assemblyman Marc Levine’s measures to limit sprawl and
density from spilling over into Marin is wrong.

I also disagree with San Francisco state Sen. Scott Wiener’s proposed bill to
undermine current designations for urban and rural densities.

While there is a shortage of housing, the factors that have produced this
shortage will not be affected by this bill. The fact that banks and investors
with builders determine what is built is driven by the profits they can make.
The space people need for housing has varied across cultures and over time. If
we look at the context of housing in San Francisco and other urban areas we find
they have promoted sprawl by their housing polices over the past six decades. We
can see this most blatantly in San Francisco.

Marin has a very small population compared with the rest of the Bay Area, and it
has substantial agriculture and recreation.

Among the Bay Area’s counties, Marin’s population comes in next to last, just
above Napa with 257,153. San Francisco’s population, according to the 2015
court, is 834,903.

Marin’s rate of growth was under 0.4 percent, as was Sonoma’s from 2010 to 2014.

Marin took longer to recover from the 2001 and 2007-09 recessions than San
Francisco, and Marin’s job growth has been virtually static since 1990, falling
between Napa and Solano, while San Francisco’s job growth has been the third
highest in the same period under that of Alameda and Santa Clara.

Job growth and incomes from Santa Clara and San Francisco are pushing commuters
out into the edges of Bay Area counties in search of affordable housing,
according to reports by Joint Venture’s Institute for Regional Studies. So Marin
is one of the counties seeing the effects of this massive growth in jobs and
lack of affordable housing.

However, while San Francisco has failed to produce affordable housing since
1970, it has also destroyed a substantial portion of its most affordable housing
(small units, especially duplexes and triplexes) replacing it with expensive,
luxury units. If you peruse the annual reports of the San Francisco Planning
Department’s housing surveys from 1970 to 2010 what you see are lists of units
demolished and units built.

The population of the city since 1970 has increased from 715,674 to 805,235, or
89,561 people in 40 years, or about 2,239 people a year.

San Jose’s population in 1970 was 459,913 and in 2010 was 945,942, an increase
of 486,029, or almost 49 percent.

San Francisco has not built sufficient housing to keep up with job growth and
its housing has become more expensive due to a housing policy that does not
protect existing affordable housing units.

San Francisco has not only experienced a rapid period of job growth in the past
decade, but it has seen a tremendous increase in the price of housing. A report
by Housing Insider documents how this has priced out workers from living in the
city and has produced our traffic.

This is not unique. We find reports of housing costs exploding from London to
South Africa, China to Australia and Cairo to Mexico City.

Why? Mainly due to the increasing trend in the past 50 years to change housing
from a product to a speculative investment vehicle.

In its July 6, 2016 edition, the San Francisco Chronicle reported how more
U.S. homes are being bought by foreigners and foreign investors. The same is
happening with U.S. investors.

Units of housing are being pulled off the open market for short-term rentals in
Airbnb-like turnovers.

The Financial Times reported in its Aug. 27, 2016 edition how home ownership was
at a 50-year low in America, yet the median housing costs have continued to rise
while wages have been stagnant.

The same is true for England were housing costs have risen to where a homebuyer
must pay six times earnings, almost double since the 1980s. In London, it is 12
times.

How can there be affordable housing in such a situation?

Robert Neuwirth’s 2006 book, “Shadow Cities: A Billion Squatters. A New Urban
World,” documents that the conditions of fast-growing cities is increasing
population pressure on city infrastructure where taxation and policies have not
provided for increased urbanization.

If San Franciscans want to point fingers, they should look closer to home.
