# Item 8a: please consider raising prices for parking spaces

I'm a Belmont resident and I frequently shop and take my girlfriend to dinner in
San Carlos. Please consider raising the price of parking as part of the parking
study approval tomorrow night. (Unfortunately, I can't make the meeting tomorrow
night to give this comment in person).

Free parking encourages residents to take more trips by car. By contrast, higher
charges for parking spaces would reduce the number of trips taken by car. This
would lower emissions and reduce congestion on San Carlos roads. A lot of
downtown traffic is due to cars circling. If you had to pay to park, more spaces
would be available, and there would be less need to circle.

The study mentions TDM and encouraging biking. But one of the best ways to
encourage other forms of transportation is *to make it cheaper relative to the
alternatives.* In this case, making parking more expensive means more people
will walk, bike, take the bus, or take a cab.

Especially on weekend nights, easy parking encourages drunk driving. Drunk
driving is very dangerous, and the penalties for drunk driving should be higher
than they are. In lieu of higher penalties for drunk drivers, it is a good idea
to reduce the number of drivers. Walking, biking, or taking Uber means there are
fewer drunk drivers on the road.

It is very expensive to build new things in San Carlos, and free parking makes
it more expensive. Parking usually has to be offered at or near ground level,
the most expensive pieces of land - some estimates say a parking space costs
$20,000 to build. Charging for parking would lower the demand for future parking
spaces in new buildings, which should make the buildings cheaper. The money
raised would also help offset the price of providing it.

Increased parking fees would help the city's bottom line, and allow it to
reduce taxes in other areas. For example, impact fees charged to new housing
development makes it difficult to offer new housing at an affordable price
range. This is tough on San Mateo County's renters, who have seen prices
increase from $1600 in 2010 to $3100 in 2017. If the city took in more money
from parking fees, it could reduce the impact fees charged to develop new
housing in San Carlos, which would help increase supply and decrease rents.

For more along these lines, please see The High Cost of Free Parking, by Donald
Shoup. A summary of the book's arguments can be found in this review in the New
York Times: http://www.nytimes.com/2010/08/15/business/economy/15view.html.

Thanks,
Kevin
